that this was the name of a lane at the eastern corner of the Palatine.
Others have thought it to be the name of the house, as the _ad malum
Punicum_ in which Domitian was born (Suet., _Dom._ 1). So later we hear
of a house at Rome _quæ est ad Palmam_ (_Codex Theod._, p. 3). The house
may have had its name from a frieze with ox-heads on it, like the tomb of
Metella, which came to be called _Capo-di-bove_. It seems less easy to
account for a lane being so called. See also p. 205.

[2] C. I. L., vol. i. p. 279.

[3] Cicero, _ad Q. Fr._ 1, 1, 21; 1, 2, 7. Velleius Pat., 2, 59; Sueton.,
_Aug._ 3.

[4] The plebeian Atii Balbi do not seem to have been important. M. Atius
Balbus was prætor in B.C. 62 (with Cæsar), governor of Sardinia B.C.
61-60, and in B.C. 59 was one of the XX viri under the Julian land law
(Cic., _ad Att._ ii. 4).

[5] These and other stories will be found in Sueton., _Aug._ 94, and Dio,
45, 2. Vergil makes skilful use of them in _Æn._, vi. 797, _sqq._

[6] Antony, when he wished to depreciate Augustus, asserted that his
great-grandfather had a rope-walk at Thurii; and some such connection of
his ancestors with that place may account for the cognomen, which would
naturally be dropped afterwards (Suet., _Aug._ 7).

[7] The marriage could not have taken place earlier than the middle of
B.C. 57, for when Atia’s first husband died Philippus was in Syria. He
was succeeded by Gabinius in B.C. 57, and reached Italy in time to stand
for the consulship, the elections that year being at the ordinary time,
_i.e._, July (Cic., _ad Att._ 4, 2).

[8] L. Marcius Philippus was the son of the famous orator, and was a warm
supporter of Cicero. With his colleague as consul-designate he proposed
the prosecution of Clodius (Cic., _ad Q. Fr._ ii. 1). When the civil
war was beginning he was allowed by Cæsar to remain neutral (Cic., _ad
Att._ ix. 15; x. 4). But Cicero found him tiresome company, for he was
garrulous and prosy (_ad Att._ xii. 9, 16, 18); and in the troublous
times following the assassination of Cæsar he set little store by his
opinion (_ad Att._ xvi. 14; _ad Brut._ i. 17).

[9] The law of B.C. 52 allowed Cæsar to be “elected in his absence”
(_absentis rationem haberi_), but said nothing of his being in possession
of a province. By long prescription the Senate had the right of deciding
when a provincial governor should be “succeeded.” But then Cæsar’s term
of provincial government had been fixed by a _lex_, which was superior
to a _Senatus-consultum_; and he might also argue that if it was
unconstitutional for a man to be elected consul while holding a province,
the Senate had violated the constitution in allowing Pompey to be consul
in B.C. 52.

[10] The Senate did not insist on the _professio_, from which Cæsar had
been exempted by name in Pompey’s law. But its contention was that it
still retained the right of naming the date at which a man was to leave
his province, and of deciding in regard to an election whether a man was
a legal candidate, which might depend on other things besides the making
or not making a _professio_.

[11] The difficulty was that both consuls were absent. There was no
one therefore capable of holding a consular election. But as the other
curule magistrates still existed, “the _auspicia_ had not returned to
the Fathers,” who could not therefore name an interrex. The Prætor
Lepidus—though willing—could not “create” a _maius imperium_. The only
way out of it was to name a Dictator (_com. hab. causa_); but one of
the consuls, according to tradition, could alone do that. Eventually
Lepidus, by a special vote of the people was authorised to name Cæsar
as Dictator—which had precedents in the cases of Fabius Maximus and
Sulla—and Cæsar, as Dictator, held the consular elections. Cæs., b. c.
ii, 21; Dio, 41, 36.

[12] Nicolas (ch. 4) says that he took the _toga virilis_ about fourteen
(περὶ ἔτη μάλιστα γεγονὼς τεσσαρακαίδεκα). But Suetonius (_Aug._ 8) says
that he spoke the _laudatio_ of his grandmother in his twelfth year, and
“four years afterwards” took the _toga virilis_.

[13] Octavius was _sui iuris_, his father being dead; his adoption
therefore required the formal passing of a _lex curiata_. Now the
opposition, supported by Antony, against this formality being carried out
was one of the grounds of Octavian’s quarrel with him in B.C. 44-3, and
the completion of it was one of the first things secured by Octavian on
his entrance into Rome in August, B.C. 43 [Appian, b. c. iii. 94; Dio,
45, 5]. This seems conclusive against the theory that Iulius adopted
him in his lifetime. Moreover all authorities speak of the adoption as
made by _Will_. Livy, _Ep._ 116, _testamento in nomen adoptatus est_;
Velleius, ii. 59, _testamentum apertum est, quo C. Octavium nepotem
sororis suæ Iuliæ adoptabat_. See also Appian, b. c. iii. 11; Dio, 45, 3;
Plutarch, _Brut._ 22. It is true that Nicolas—speaking of the triumph of
B.C. 46—(§ 8) says υἱὸν ἤδη πεποιημἐνος. But if he means anything more
than “regarding him as a son,” he twice afterwards contradicts himself:
See § 17 ἀπήγγελλον τά τε ἄλλα καὶ ὡς ἐν ταῖς διαθήκαις ὡς υἱὸς εἴη
Καίσαρι ἐγγεγραμμένος. _Cf._ § 13.

[14] Cicero, _ad Att._ xii. 48, 49; Nicholas, § 14; Valer. Max., 1, 15,
2. For the subsequent fate of the man see Cicero, _ad Att._ xiv. 6, 7, 8;
App., b. c. iii. 2-3.

[15] The patrician _gentes_ were dying out, and it was thought good
to replenish their numbers, thus gradually forming a class of nobles
distinct from these ennobled by office. In making the Octavii patricians,
the initiative was taken by the Senate; in later times, however, the
power of creating _patricii_ was conferred on the imperator. Iulius seems
also to have done it on his own authority. (Dio, 43, 47; Suet., _Aug._ 2.)

[16] He took with him Apollodorus of Pergamus, a well-known author of a
system of rhetoric (Suet., _Aug._ 89; Strabo, 13, 4, 3; Quinct., 3, 1,
17). Other teachers of his, whether at Apollonia or elsewhere, are Areius
of Alexandria, Alexander of Pergamus, Athenodorus of Tarsus (Suet. _l.
c._; Dio, 51, 4; Plutarch, _Ant._ 11; Nicol. Dam., § 17; Zonaras, 10, 38).

[17] Suet., _Aug._ 65; Vell. Paterc., 2, 59, 64; App., b. c. 5, 66; Dio,
48, 33. The other instance of a friend who fell into disfavour and ruin
quoted by Suetonius is Cornelius Gallus. But he does not seem to have
been at Apollonia. He was nearly three years older than Augustus, and in
B.C. 44-3 was perhaps with Pollio in Bætica. See Cic., _ad Fam._ x. 32.

[18] Nicolas, § 16; App., b. c. iii. 9-10.

[19] Dolabella consul for the last half of B.C. 44 with Antony; Pansa and
Hirtius, B.C. 43; Plancus and Dec. Brutus B.C. 42. Probably M. Brutus and
C. Cassius (or certainly the former) B.C. 41 [Plut., _Cæs._ 62; Cic., _ad
Fam._ xii. 2]. For B.C. 43 prætors and other magistrates were named, but
for the next years only consuls and tribunes.

[20] Dio, 43, 47, καὶ ἔς γε τὰ ἔθνη ἀκληρωτὶ ἐξεπέμφθησαν.

[21] M. Brutus, C. Cassius, Dec. Brutus, L. Cimber, C. Trebonius.

[22] Cic., _ad Att._ xiv. 9; Cæs., b. c. ii. 22; Plut., _Ant._ xi.

[23] Dio, 46, 60.

[24] Cæsar had auxiliaries in Spain from Aquitania B.C. 49; Cæs., b. c.
i. 39.

[25] Cicero, _ad Att._ xiv. 5, 8, 9.

[26] Livy, _Ep._ 62. Appian says that Metellus did not fight, but was
received as a friend, wintered at Salonæ, and then went home and claimed
a triumph (_Illyr._ xi.).

[27] Eutrop., v. 4.

[28] _Id._ vi. 4; Oros., v. 23.

[29] Cæs., b. c. iii. 5, 9.

[30] Livy, _Ep._ 110; App., b. c. ii. 47.

[31] _Id._, b. c. ii. 59.

[32] Cæs., _b. Alex._ 42-3.

[33] _Id._, 34-6.

[34] Cic., _ad Fam._ v. 10 (_a_), 10, 11.

[35] App., _Illyr._ 13.

[36] App., b. c. iv. 75; Dio, 47, 21. Vatinius was ill, and his late
reverses had lost him the confidence of his men, who insisted on being
transferred to Brutus.

[37] Dio, 43, 42; Horace, _Odes_, iii. 1, 13.

[38] Cæs., _b. Alex._ 48-64; _Hisp._ 7, 12.

[39] App., b. c. ii. 107.

[40] Wrongly called Aulus Albinus by Appian, b. c. ii. 48; see Klein,
_die Verwaltungsbeamten der Provinzen_, p. 83.

[41] Cic., _ad Fam._ xiii. 30, 36, 50, 78, 79; Cæs., _b. Afr._ 2, 26, 34.

[42] Cic., _ad Fam._ vi. 16, 17.

[43] Dio, 48, 17, 19; Livy, _Ep._ 123; Appian, b. c. iv. 84. A certain
M. Casinius was nominated to Sicily for B.C. 43, but did not go there,
perhaps owing to the order of the Senate (meant to support Dec. Brutus)
made on the 20th of December, B.C. 44, that all governors should retain
their provinces till farther orders (Cic., _ad Fam._ xii. 22, 25).

[44] App., b. c. ii. 48.

[45] Cic., _ad Att._ xv. 7; xvi. 3.

[46] App., b. c. iv. 2; Dio, 46, 55.

[47] Sueton., _Aug._ 47. This probably means after his accession to sole
power. According to Nicolas, § 11-12, he visited Africa with Cæsar in
B.C. 45. See p. 13. There is no record, however, of his ever having been
to Sardinia.

[48] App., b. c. v. 67. The hold of Sext. Pompeius on Sardinia was
recognised in the “treaty” of Misenum made in B.C. 39 (Dio, 48, 36; App.,
b. c. v. 72).

[49] See Note 2, p. 24.

[50] Cicero, _3 Phil._ § 26; _ad Fam._ xii. 22, 23, 30.

[51] Appian, b. c. iii. 85, 91.

[52] Appian, b. c. iv. 36, 53-56; v. 26; Dio, 48, 21-23. It seems
impossible to reconcile Appian and Dio. The course of events here
indicated agrees chiefly with Dio, whose account appears on the whole the
more reasonable.

[53] Cæs., b. c. iii., 102.

[54] _Id._, _b. Alex._ 42.

[55] Drawn up by the commissioners after the fall of Corinth, B.C. 146.

[56] Cicero, _ad Att._ xi. 15; Cæsar, b. c. ii. 56, 106; Dio, 42, 14.

[57] Servius had fought against Cæsar at Pharsalia, though his son was
with Cæsar. After the battle he retired to Samos and refused to continue
the war. See Cicero, _ad Fam._ iv. 3, 4, 11, 12; vi. 6; xiii. 17, 19, 23,
25, 28.

[58] App., b. c. v. 72.

[59] Cicero, _ad Fam._ vi. 12; App., b. c. iii. 2.

[60] See Cicero, _13 Phil._ 23 (Antony’s letter).

[61] P. Cornelius Lentulus Spinther. See his letter to Cicero, _ad Fam._
xii. 14, 15.

[62] Cæs., _b. Alex._ 66: _rebus omnibus provinciæ et finitimarum
civitatum constitutis_ is all that we are told.

[63] Dio, 47, 26. Appian gives two accounts of Bassus. In the first he
represents him as the real commander of the legions, while Sext. Iulius
was the nominal chief. He, however, gives an alternative account more in
accordance with that of Dio. See App., b. c. iii. 77; iv. 58, _sq._

[64] Cicero, _ad Att._ xiv. 9.

[65] _Id._, _ad Fam._ xii. 11 (Cassius to Cicero); xii. 12.

[66] Cicero, _ad Att._ vi. 5; Valer. Max., vi. 1, 15.

[67] Cyrene with four other cities—Apollonia, Ptolemais, Arsinoe,
Berenice—formed a Pentapolis. (Livy, _Epit._ 70.)

[68] App., b. c. I. iii. _sq._; Sall., _hist. fr._ ii. 39.

[69] Vell. Pat., ii. 34; Dio, 36, 2; Iust. 39, 5; Livy, _Epit._ 100. The
laws of Crete were left in force (Cic., _Mur._ § 74; _pro Flacc._ § 30).

[70] App., b. c. iii. 12, 16, 36; iv. 57; Dio, 47, 21.

[71] Cicero, _2 Phil._ § 97.

[72] The possibility of these legions crossing to Italy had caused no
little anxiety at Rome; Cicero, _ad Att._ xiv. 16.

[73] Cicero, _ad Att._ xv. 21.

[74] Suetonius (_Iul._ 83) says, “three-fourths”; so also does Nicolas
Dam. 17 (τρία μέρη τῶν χρημάτων). But Livy (_Ep._ 116) says “one-half”
(_ex semisse_). It is possible Livy may refer to the amount left when
the legacy of 300 sesterces to each citizen was deducted. Nicolas seems
to think, however, that this legacy was charged on the remaining fourth.
Octavian certainly undertook to pay it, but then Pinarius and Pedius
handed over their shares to him.

[75] Appian (b. c. ii. 147) says that the body itself was not seen during
Antony’s _laudatio_, but that a wax figure was displayed which by some
mechanical contrivance was made to revolve and show all the wounds.

[76] Nicolas (§ 17) would seem to send them straight to Antium. But
from Cicero’s letters it is clear that Brutus at any rate went first to
Lanuvium, _ad Att._ xiv. 10, 21; xv. 9. They seem to have gone to Antium
towards the end of May or beginning of June.

[77] Suet., _Aug._ 25.

[78] The last being the adjectival form of his original name, in
accordance with the usual custom in cases of adoption.

[79] Cicero, _ad Att._ xiv. 5, 10, 11, 12.

[80] Cicero, _ad Att._ xiv. 20, 21. Dio (45, 6) says that the introducing
tribune was Tib. Canutius. But it seems probable that this refers to a
second speech.

[81] Cic., _ad Att._ xv. 2. There is a singularly manly and frank letter
from Matius to Cicero (_ad Fam._ xi. 28), defending his attachment to
Cæsar and his services to Octavian.

[82] Appian, b. c. 3, 20, τῶν προσόδων ἐξ οὗ παρῆλθεν ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐς
αὐτὸν ἀντὶ τοῦ ταμιείου συμφερομένων. The sole management of the Treasury
had been committed to Cæsar in B.C. 45 (Dio, 43, 44, τἁ δημόσια χρήματα
μόνον διοικεῖν). He had taken it out of the hands of the _quæstors_ and
appointed two _præfecti_ to manage it: but it does not seem that they had
anything to do with the money in the temple of Ops, as to which there was
some doubt as to its being “public money” in the ordinary sense.

