[83] Cicero, _1 Phil._ § 17; _2 Phil._ § 93.

[84] Cicero, in _2 Phil._ § 93, seems to assume that Antony had taken the
money all at once. But from Cicero’s own letters it would seem that the
process of despoiling the temple of Ops was a gradual one, and that the
use made of the money by Antony was more or less a matter of conjecture.
On the 27th of April he writes: “You mention plundering going on at the
temple of Ops. I, too, was a witness to that at the time” (_ad Att._
xiv. 14). On the 7th of May he says that Dolabella had a great share
of it (_ad Att._ xiv. 18). In November he says that his nephew Quintus
knew all about it, and meant to reveal it to the public (_ad Att._ xvi.
14). Appian (b. c. iii. 20) makes Antony say to Octavian: “The money
transferred to my house was not so large a sum as you conjecture, nor is
any part of it in my custody now. The men in power—except Dolabella and
my brothers—divided up the whole of it as the property of a tyrant.”

[85] Cic., _ad Att._ xvi. 8.

[86] Dio, 45, 6; this seems a different case from that mentioned by App.,
b. c. iii. 47, and referred to by Cicero, _ad Att._ xvi. 15, as happening
later in this same year.

[87] See _ante_ p. 14: Dio, 45, 2; Sueton., _Aug._ 2, 10; Tac., _Ann._
xi. 25.

[88] Dio, 45, 4; Cicero, _ad Att._ xv. 3.

[89] Cicero, _2 Phil._ § 100; _ad Att._ xiv. 20, 21.

[90] _Id._, _ad Att._ xiv. 3 (9th April); xv. 4 (24th May); _2 Phil._
§ 108; Appian, b. c. iii. 5. The Senate had been induced to vote him a
bodyguard. See the letter of Brutus and Cassius to Antony in Cicero, _ad
Fam._ xi. 2.

[91] Dio, 45, 10; Cic., _ad Att._ xvi. 1. The negotiation after all
fell through on the question of Sextus’s recovering the actual house
and property of his father, much of which was in Antony’s hands (Cic.,
_ad Att._ xvi. 4; Dio, 45, 9). He refused to accept a mere money
compensation. Eventually, when the Senate had broken with Antony, it made
terms with Sextus, appointing him commander of the naval forces of the
Republic. Consequently he was proscribed by the Triumvirs. App., b. c.
iii. 4.

[92] Cic., _ad Att._ xv. 10, 11.

[93] Cicero (_2 Phil._ § 109) declares that Antony’s bodyguard was
stationed round the Senate—some of them being foreign mercenaries—and
that his opponents therefore did not venture to enter the house.

[94] Appian, b. c. iii. 29-30. But Appian in regard to the order of
events here is very confused and often wrong.

[95] Cicero, _ad Att._ xvi. 4, 5.

[96] _Id._, _1 Phil._ § 14; _ad Att._ xvi. 7; _ad Fam._ xii. 2.

[97] Nicolas (§ 30), Appian (b. c. iii. 39), Plutarch (_Ant._ 16), acquit
Augustus. The two writers who adopt Cicero’s view of the truth of the
accusation are Seneca (_de Clement._ 1, 9, 1) and Suetonius (_Aug._ 10).
See Cicero, _ad Fam._ xii. 23.

[98] _ad Att._ xv. 12.

[99] See _ante_, p. 3.

[100] He had the title _Imperator_ inherited from Cæsar (Dio, 43, 44);
but this was a mere honorary title, and could not be held to give
_imperium_. He was careful to use it however, as in the inscription
recording the formation of the triumvirate.... EMILIVS M. ANTONIVS. IMP.
CÆSAR. III VIR R.P.C. A.D. IV KAL. DEC. AD. PRID. KAL. IAN. SEXT....

[101] _Monum. Ancyr._ I, annos undeviginti natus exercitum privato
consilio et privata impensa comparavi: per quem rem publicam _dominatione
factionis oppressam in libertatem vindicavi_. Compare Cæsar, _b. civ._ 1,
22, ut se et Populum Romanum _factione paucorum oppressum in libertatem
vindicaret_.

[102] Cicero, _ad Att._ xvi. 8 and 9.

[103] _Id._, _ad Fam._ xii. 23.

[104] App., b. c. iii. 43-45; Cic., _3 Phil._ § 10; Dio, 45, 13.

[105] Cic., _ad Att._ xvi. 10, 13 a, 13 b, 14.

[106] _Id._, _3 Phil._ § 19.

[107] _pestifera_, _13 Phil._ § 19.

[108] Cicero, _3 Phil._ §§ 19-27; _5 Phil._ § 23; _13 Phil._ § 19; App.,
b. c. iii. 45.

[109] Cic., _ad Att._ xvi. 11.

[110] _Id._ xvi. 14.

[111] _Id._ xvi. 15. It seems from Appian (b. c. iii. 31) that Octavian
was not a candidate, but he was generally supposed to wish it, and that
therefore many were going to vote for him. He ostensibly supported
another candidate—Flaminius. Antony stopped the election on the ground
that there was no need to fill up a vacancy so late in the year. This
settled the question. But it is doubtful whether this does not refer to
an earlier occasion.

[112] Cicero, _ad Att._ xvi. 15, 3.

[113] _Id._, _ad Fam._ xi. 6; _3 Phil._ §§ 37-39.

[114] The passages are Cicero, _5 Phil._ §§ 45-47; _11 Phil._ § 20; _13
Phil._ § 39; _Monum. Ancyr._ § 3; Livy, _Ep._ 118; C. I. L. x. 8375;
Suet., _Aug._ 10, 26. Dio (40, 29) says that he was in the Senate ἐν
τοῖς τεταμιευκόσι—_inter quæstorios_. This may be a misunderstanding of
Cicero’s proposal that for _purposes of election_ he was to count as
having been quæstor. The rank of proprætor was necessary for his command
in the army, not for his entrance into the Senate.

[115] Pollio in Bætica, Lepidus in Gallia Narbonensis and Hispania
Citerior, and Plancus in Northern Gaul.

[116] _Laudandum, ornandum, tollendum_ (Cic., _ad Fam._ xi. 20, 21). This
epigram seems to have been inspired by the exultant hopes roused by the
news of the battle of Forum Gallorum.

[117] _Monum. Ancyr._ § 1, respublica ne quid detrimenti caperet me
pro prætore cum consulibus providere iussit. This was a general order,
neither Antony nor any particular _hostis_ being named.

[118] Octavian first assumed the _fasces_ (symbol of imperium) on the 7th
of January (C. I. L. x. 8375.)

[119] Cicero, _8 Phil._ §§ 25-28.

[120] The letter is preserved in the 13th Philippic, with Cicero’s
bitter comments. It dwells on the favours and honours voted to the chief
assassins, as well as the abolition of many of Cæsar’s _acta_. Antony
also asserts that Lepidus and Plancus are on his side and warns Octavian
that Cicero is playing him false.

[121] The country is very flat, but was intersected by drains and
watercourses, making military evolutions difficult, if not impossible, in
the rainy season. (App., b. c. 3, 65.)

[122] Such as the cavalry engagement between Pontius Aquila and Tib.
Munatius Plancus at Pollentia (Dio, 46, 38). Octavian also suffered some
loss by the desertion of some Gallic cavalry (_ib._ 37).

[123] Cic., _ad Brutum_, ii. 2.

[124] In enrolling legions Bassus was probably justified by the _SCtum
ultimum_, which included the prætors. He was known to be a supporter of
Antony, and might be thought capable of occupying Rome in his interest.
We shall see afterwards that he joined him in Cisalpine Gaul. Some rumour
of his being likely to act in this way had been rife before January 1st,
when he was only prætor-designate. (See Cic., _ad Att._ xvi. 1; _ad
Brut._ i. 3.)

[125] Cicero says of Octavian that he _secundum proelium fecit_ because
he _castra multarum legionum paucis cohortibus tutatus est_ (_14 Phil._ §
28). The attack on the camp is not mentioned elsewhere (_ib._ § 37). For
his being greeted as Imperator see C. I. L. ix. 8375.

[126] Cic., _ad Brut._ 1, 3, 5.

[127] Suet., _Aug._ 11; Cic., _ad Brut._ i. 6.

[128] Cic., _ad Fam._ xi. 21.

[129] Dio, 46, 41; Livy, _Ep._ 118.

[130] Cic., _ad Brut._ i. 15.

[131] _Id._, _ad Fam._ xi. 20, 21, see _ante_ p. 52.

[132] _Id._, _ad Brut._ i. 4; App., b. c. iii. 82; Dio, 46, 42; Plut.,
_Cic._ 46. There was evidently some rumour of Cicero intending to be
consul, though he speaks with rather affected indignation of Octavian
wishing to be elected also (_ad Brut._ i. 10).

[133] Cic., _ad Brut._ 1, 3.

[134] _Id._ § 4.

[135] Cic., _ad Fam._ xi. 10.

[136] He was perhaps deceived by the report that Octavian’s legions had
taken an oath not to fight against any that had served under Iulius
Cæsar. This applied to some men at present with Antony. But Dio implies
that the oath was at the secret instigation of Octavian himself (Dio, 46,
42).

[137] Cic., _ad Fam._ xi. 13.

[138] _Id._ xi. 19.

[139] _Id._ xi. 20.

[140] _Id._ xi. 14.

[141] Cic., _ad Fam._ x. 23.

[142] _Id._ x. 24.

[143] _Id._ xi. 12 and 14.

[144] Cic., _ad Fam._ x. 16.

[145] _Id._ x. 35; xii. 35.

[146] _Id._ xi. 26, _cp._ xi. 13.

[147] _Id._, _ad. Brut._ i. 10.

[148] A similar technical difficulty had occurred in B.C. 49 (both
consuls being absent, and unwilling, of course, to name a dictator), and
had been got over by the nomination of a dictator by the prætor under a
special law. See p. 8; Cic., _ad Fam._ x. 26; _ad M. Brut._ i. 5.

[149] Plancus (Cic., _ad Fam._ x. 29) expresses surprise that Cæsar
wished to give up the glory of defeating Antony for the sake of “a two
months’ consulship.” But this only shows that Plancus did not understand
Octavian’s object or policy.

[150] Suet., _Aug._ 26; Dio, 46, 43; Plut., _Pomp._ 58. Appian (b. c. 3,
82), without alluding to this scene, regards the application itself as
the result of a secret intrigue with Cicero, and Cicero’s exclamation, if
made, may have been intended as encouraging and not sarcastic.

[151] The number given by Appian (b. c. iii. 88). Octavian had five
legions when he went to Gaul: two raised in Campania of veterans, one of
_tirones_, the Martia and Quarta (App., b. c. iii. 47). The other three
must have been made up from the armies of Pansa and Hirtius. None of
the veteran legions in these two armies would consent to follow Decimus
Brutus (Cic., _ad Fam._ xi. 19).

[152] Cic., _ad Brut._ 1, 18.

[153] _Ib._ and App., b. c. iii. 90.

[154] The panic had been increased by some damage done by his soldier on
the march to properties of known anti-Cæsareans.

[155] Confiscation of property and the forbidding of “fire and water”
followed as a matter of course. One of the assassins—P. Servilius
Casca—was tribune, and as such could not legally be condemned, but he
vacated his tribuneship by flying from Rome and was condemned with the
rest.

[156] The Senate had nothing to do with this _quæstio_, which was
established by a _lex_, but its attitude to Octavian amounted to a
condonation if not an active approval.

[157] According to Appian (b. c. iii. 97), Pollio for some time declined
to join Antony and Lepidus. He seems to have done so when their outlawry
was removed.

[158] Decimus Brutus first tried to reach Ravenna, hoping to sail
to Macedonia and join M. Brutus. Headed back by Cæsar’s advance, he
recrossed the Alps (being gradually deserted by his men) and trusted
himself to a Gaul, who had received favours from him of old. But his host
communicated with Antony, and by his orders put him to death. There were
other versions of his death. Perhaps neither Antony nor Cæsar cared to
ask questions so long as he was dead. (App., b. c. iii. 97-98; Dio, 46,
53; Velleius Pat., ii. 64; Livy, _Ep._ 120.)

[159] Plancus did not accompany Antony into Italy; he stayed in Gaul,
busying himself with the foundation of Lugdunum, and apparently
suppressing some movements in the Eastern Alps, for at the end of the
year coming home to enter on his consulship, he celebrated a triumph _ex
Rhætis_ [Inscrip. Neap., 4089; Fast. Capitol. 29 Dec. A. V. 711.] Pollio,
who had presently to assent to the proscription of his father-in-law, L.
Quintius, was left in charge of Transpadane Gaul, to arrange for lands
for the veterans. It was in this business that he came across Vergil and
his farm.

[160] Daughter of Fulvia by her first husband, P. Clodius.

[161] Plut., _Ant._ 19; App., b. c. iv. 6; Dio, 46, 44.

[162] The usual interval (_tres nundinæ_) for _promulgatio_ was dispensed
with.

[163] Appian, b. c. iv. 5; Livy, _Ep._ 120. Of the 69 names given by
Appian, he records the escape of 31. This tallies roughly with the
discrepancy between his and Livy’s reckoning.

[164] Appian, b. c. iv. 36.

[165] Suet., _Aug._ 27.

[166] Dio, 47, 14.

[167] _Id._ 47, 16-17.

[168] App., b. c. 4, 34.

[169] _Lassam crudelitatem_, Sen. _de Clem._ 1, 9, 2. The other opinions
referred to are Velleius, ii. 66; App., b. c. iv. 42, 45; Plut., _Ant._
21; Dio, 47, 7; Sueton., _Aug._ 27. For Toranius, see Nic. Dam. 2.

[170] Sueton., _Aug._ 61; Dio, 47, 17; [Tacit.] _de orat._ 29.
