
[171] Cicero, _13 Phil._ §§ 8-12, 50; Velleius, ii. 73. The decree was
passed on the 20th of March, B.C. 43.

[172] Dio, 48, 17 _sq._; Livy, _Ep._ 123.

[173] App., b. c. iv. 85; Dio, 47, 36; Livy, _Ep._ 123.

[174] Dio, 51, 2; Suet., _Aug._ 13.

[175] At any rate the head never reached Rome, but was lost at sea. App.,
b. c. iv. 135; Dio, 47, 49; Plut., _Ant._, 22; _Brut._ 53; Sueton.,
_Aug._ 13.

[176] Ulpian (dig. 48, 24) quotes this lost autobiography; see _Mon.
Ancyr._ § 3.

[177] The first meeting of Antony and Cleopatra, when the queen was rowed
up the Cydnus in her barge, dressed as Venus with attendant cupids, seems
to have been in the autumn of B.C. 42 (Plut., _Anton._ 25-6.). He had
seen her once before in B.C. 56 when he accompanied Gabinius to restore
her father. But she must have been a mere child then.

[178] These legions had behaved badly at Placentia, demanding a sum of
money from the inhabitants. Calenus and Ventidius may have justified
their action on this score (Dio, 48, 10).

[179] From _caliga_, “a soldier’s boot.”

[180] Dio, 48, 12.

[181] Appian, b. c. 4, 30; Dio, 48, 31. Livy, however (_Ep._ 121), says
_M. Lepido fuso_, as though he had resisted and had been beaten.

[182] Livy, _Ep._ 126; Velleius, ii. 74; App., b. c. v. 48-49; Dio, 48,
14; Seneca, _de Clem._ 1, 11, 1. The uncertainty of historical testimony
is illustrated by the fact that both Dio and Appian name C. Canutius (Tr.
Pl. B.C. 44) among the victims at Perusia, while Velleius (ii. 64) says
that he was the first to suffer under the proscription in B.C. 43.

[183] C. I. L., i. 697.

[184] This was to safeguard Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus. There is some
doubt, however, as to his having been an assassin. Cocceius denied it
(App., b. c. v. 62). Suetonius (Nero 3) does the same. But Cicero (_2
Phil._ §§ 27, 30) says that he was; and Appian himself does the same (b.
c. v. 59). Dio thrice speaks of him as a σφαγεύς (48, 7, 29, 54). At
any rate he was condemned by the _lex Pedia_, as though he had been an
assassin. He may have been one of those who joined the assassins on the
Capitol _after_ the murder.

[185] Appian, b. c. v. 65. It has been doubted whether this or the
meeting of B.C. 37 was the one to which Horace accompanied his patron
Mæcenas. In favour of this one is the mention of Cocceius Nerva by Horace
(_Sat._ 1 v. 28, 50), against it is the way in which he is mentioned
with Mæcenas as aversos _soliti_ componere amicos, as if he had been so
engaged before. But though in the second meeting he is not mentioned by
Appian, he may have been there. Something has been made of the mention
of the croaking frogs (l. 14), as this meeting could hardly have been
earlier than July, when the Italian frogs are said to be silent. For the
Ovations see C. I. L., i. p. 461.

[186] This was one of the chief grievances. Hor., _Ep._ ix. 9, _minatus
urbi vincla, que detraxerat servis amicus perfidis_.

[187] Hor., _Od._ ii. 1, 15-16; Dio, 48, 41; C. I. L., i. p. 461. Pollio
after this withdrew from active political life and devoted himself to
literature. He seems to have taken no part in the subsequent quarrels
between Antony and Augustus.

[188] Dio, 48, 19, 48; Hor., _Epod._ 9, 17.

[189] The first period ended on the last day of B.C. 38; but neither
Antony nor Cæsar had laid down their imperium of office. They now assumed
that it went on from the first day of B.C. 37, the want of legal sanction
during the intervening months being ignored. There is no certain trace of
this second triumvirate having been confirmed by a _lex_; yet one would
think that they would have taken care to have that formality observed.
See p. 143.

[190] Cicero, _ad Fam._ xi. 9; Cicero himself calls him _levissimus_, _ad
Brut._ 1, 15, § 9.

[191] In B.C. 52 Cicero had wished to give his daughter Tullia in
marriage to Tiberius Claudius Nero (Cic., _Att._ 6, 6.).

[192] He was quæstor in B.C. 48, and therefore was not born later than
B.C. 78. Livia was born B.C. 58.

[193] Even Suetonius, not much inclined to speak good of Augustus, admits
that he _dilexit et probavit unice ac perseveranter_.

[194] Suetonius (c. 22) says that he had two ovations—after Philippi and
after the bellum Siculum. But if an ovation was decreed after Philippi,
it was not celebrated till B.C. 40, upon the reconciliation with Antony.
The second was this. Another had been voted in B.C. 43 after Mutina, but
not celebrated (C. I. L. i. p. 461). See also p. 100.

[195] Appian (b. c. v. 132) says that they elected him perpetual tribune
(αὐτὸν ... εἕλοντο δήμαρχον ἐς ἀεί). Dio (49, 15) only says that they
gave him the personal sacredness of the tribunes and the right of sitting
on their bench. Orosius (6, 18, 34) says that the Senate voted _ut in
perpetuum tribuniciæ potestatis esset_. We shall have to discuss this
later on, but it must be said at once that Augustus was never tribune,
and that it seems doubtful whether the _tribunicia potestas_ was given in
its full sense at this time.

[196] Dio, 49, 14; Strabo, x. 4, 9.

[197] Dio, 49, 34.

[198] App., b. c. v. 132; Suet., _Aug._ 32.

[199] Or, as they were also called Vetus, and Nova Africa. The former was
the old province formed of the territory of Carthage, the latter the new
province formed after the battle of Thapsus (B.C. 46) of which the first
governor was the historian Sallust. See pp. 23-4.

[200] Appian, _Illyr._ 17; Dio, 49, 34, 38.

[201] Appian, _Illyr._ 18-21; Dio, 49, 37. The Iapydes (a wild tribe) had
first been attacked in B.C. 129 by C. Sempronius and subdued after some
disasters. (Livy, _Ep._ 59.)

[202] Pliny, _N. H._ 36 § 121.

[203] The Porticus Octaviæ, of which an arch remains, was a rectangular
cloister enclosing the temples of Jupiter Stator and Iuno Regina.

[204] Dio, 49, 15; Sueton., _Aug._ 72.

[205] Horace, _Epod._ ix. ii.; _cp._ Ov., _Met._ 15, 826.

[206] An anecdote has been preserved illustrating the policy of “sitting
on the hedge,” which must have prevailed among many while the contest
between the two leaders was still undecided. After Actium, when Cæsar
landed (the time and place are charmingly vague), a man offered a
_cornix_ which had been taught to say, “Ave, Cæsar, imperator et victor.”
He bought the bird at a large price, whereat the man’s partner, being
jealous, urged that he should be forced to bring another bird, which
when brought repeated as it had been taught, “_Ave, Antoni, imperator et
victor_.”

[207] Dio, 50, 5; but Suetonius, _Aug._ 17, says that he was declared a
_hostis_.

[208] Dio, 50, 5. Thus Horace, on hearing the rumours of Antony’s defeat,
exclaims (somewhat prematurely), _Epod._ ix. 27:

    “_Terra marique victus hostis punico,_
    _lugubre mutavit sagum._”

[209] Bocchus of Mauretania, Tarchondemus of Cilicia Aspera, Archilaus of
Cappadocia, Amyntas of Lycaonia and Galatia, Philadelphus of Paphlagonia,
Malchus of Arabia, Herod of Judæa, Sadalas of Thrace, Polemon of Pontus.
(Plut., _Ant._ 61.)

[210] Dio, 50, 14-23.

[211] Dio, 50-31, says, ὑετός τε ἐν τούτῳ λαβρὸς καὶ ζάλη πολλή. But
Plutarch, _Ant._ 65, says that after four days of stormy weather on the
day of battle νηνεμίας καὶ γαλὴνης γενομένης συνῄεσαν.

[212] Suet., _Aug._ 17.

[213] The earlier writers, Horace (_Od._ i. 37, 27) and Velleius (2, 87),
seem to have no doubt about the snake story. Livy (as we have him) says
nothing either way except that she died by suicide (_Ep._ 133). It is the
later writers who express the doubt, Suet., _Aug._ 17; Plut., _Ant._ 86;
Dio, 51, 14.

[214] This word—one of the financial terms borrowed from Sicily (lit. “a
basket”)—was perhaps not commonly used in the restricted sense in the
time of Augustus, though the thing existed. Into the emperor’s _fisc_
went the revenues of the imperial provinces; but the balance in the case
of most was not large. Cicero indeed (_pro lege Manil_, § 14) says that
none of the provinces except Asia did much more than pay its expenses.
This was probably an exaggeration, but not a very great one.

[215] This, it should be remembered, was exclusive of the legions
regularly raised for certain provinces and stationed in them.

[216] _Mon. Ancyr._ 3, 16.

[217] Traces of the work of Augustus in provincial towns may still be
seen, as at Nismes and other towns in South-eastern France.

[218] Horace, _Odes_ iii. 3.

[219] In the _Mon. Ancyr._ 20, he says that he repaired 82 temples in
B.C. 28, and the Flaminian road with all but two of its bridges in B.C.
27.

[220] The foundations of the triple arch at Rome were discovered in
1888 between the temple of Cæsar and that of the Castores. For the
inscription see C. I. L. vii. 872. _SENATUS . POPULUSQUE . ROMANUS . IMP
. CÆSARI . DIVI . IULI . F . COS . QUINCT . COS . DESIG . SEXT . IMP .
SEPT . REPUBLICA . CONSERVATA._ The date here indicated is B.C. 29. See
Lanciani, _Ruins of Ancient Rome_, p. 270. Middleton, _Remains of Ancient
Rome_, vol. i. p. 284. There does not appear to be any record of the arch
at Brundisium.

[221] Vergil, _Georg._ iv. 560, _Cæsar dum magnus ad altum fulminat
Euphratem bello._ Horace, _Od._ 1, 12, 53:

    _Ille seu Parthos Latio imminentes_
    _Egerit iusto domitos triumpho,_
    _Sive subjectos Orientis oræ Seras et Indos._

Similar exaggerations will be found scattered throughout the poems of
Propertius (ii. 7, 3; iii. 1, 13; iii. 23, 5; iv. 3, 4; iv. 4, 48; iv.
11, 3). Still more exaggerated language was used afterwards on the
restoration of the standards (B.C. 20).

[222] A good deal of confusion in our authorities has arisen by a
failure to distinguish between a _censoria potestas_ granted like the
_tribunicia_ by special vote and the _censoria potestas_ inherent in
the consulship, from which it had been devolved in B.C. 444. In the
_Monumentum_, ch. 8, Augustus himself says nothing about the _censoria
potestas_, but in the Venusian fasti (C. I. L. ix. 422) we find _imp.
Cæsar vi. M. Agrippa II. Cos. idem censoria potestate lustrum fecerunt_.
Suetonius (c. 27) knew that he was not Censor, but supposed him to have
acted under a decree granting him _morum legumque regimen perpetuum_, an
office, however, which Augustus expressly says that he declined (_Mon._,
ch. 6). Dio (52, 42) describes him as τιμητεύσας σὺν τῷ Ἀγρίππᾳ, a direct
confusion between the censorial power possessed by a Consul and that
bestowed independently. He, however, apparently did receive _censoria
potestas_ (never the censorship) in B.C. 19 for five years.

[223] _Rex sacrorum_, the greater _flamens_, the Salii had still to be
patricians. An _interrex_ also must be a patrician, but that office was
now practically at an end. The last case of an _interrex_ was in B.C. 52.

[224] A jest that was reproduced in London when country peers came up to
vote against the Home Rule Bill and were said by gossips to be obliged to
ask their way to the House of Lords. A popular ballad also was sung about
the streets—

    “Cæsar leads the Gauls in triumph and guides them to the Senate house;
    Gauls have doffed their native brogues and donned the Senate’s
      laticlave!”

Sueton., _Cæs._ 72, 80. See also Cicero, 9 _Phil._ § 12; 13 _Phil._ §
27; _ad Fam._ vi. 18; _Bell. Afr._ 28; Dio, 42, 51; 43, 27. Compare the
career of P. Ventidius Bassus, brought a prisoner from Asculum to adorn
the triumph of Pompey after the Social war, then a mule contractor to
Cæsar, and afterwards going through all the offices to the consulship in
B.C. 43.

[225] On the analogy of slaves enfranchised by will. Suet., _Aug._ 35;
Plutarch, _Ant._ 15.

[226] Cicero calls such a man a _voluntarius Senator_, 13 _Phil._ § 28.

[227] Dio, 48, 34.

[228] Suet., _Aug._ 35; Dio, 52, 42. In the _Monumentum_ (c. 25) he
reckons the number of Senators who had served under him as “more than
700.” To them must be added those who had not taken active service and
those who were with Antony.

[229] Dio, 52, 42. The regulation had always existed because every
Senator was bound to attend if called upon, and therefore must be within
reach, unless he was one of those _qui reipublicæ causa abessent_. (Livy,
43, 11.) Thus Cicero, defending the Senators who crossed over to join
Pompey in Epirus, says to Atticus (viii. 15) that there was hardly one
who had not a legal right to cross, either as having imperium, or being
legatus to an imperator. The usual means of evading this was to obtain
a _libera legatio_ for a fixed time. Occasionally a man got himself
named an ordinary legatus to a provincial governor, but was allowed to
go elsewhere with some colourable commission. But this was an abuse. See
Cicero, _ad Fam._ xii. 21; _ad Q. Frat._ ii. 9; _ad Att._ xv. 11. Sicily
and Gallia Narbonensis were excepted as being practically Italy, or, as
Cicero says, “suburban provinces.”

[230] Sueton., _Aug._ 36; Dio, 3, 19; Tacitus, _Ann._ 5, 4.

[231] ὅρον τὴν ἕκτην ὑπάτειαν αὑτοῦ προσθείς. Dio, 53, 2. See Tacitus,
_Ann._ iii. 28.

[232] The doubt was an old one. Appian in one place affirms and in
another denies that there was a _lex_ for the second period of the
triumvirs (_Illyr._ 28; b. c. v. 95). No other authority mentions one,
and it certainly was not passed in the early months of B.C. 37, that is,
till after the triumvirs had already continued their office without legal
confirmation for some time. Willems (_le Sénat_, ii. 761) holds that
there was a plebiscitum; Mommsen that there was not.

[233] _Mon. Ancyr._ ch. 34.

[234] In B.C. 28 he took care to transfer the consular fasces to his
colleague Agrippa in alternative months, and when with soldiers to give
the watchword jointly with him. (Dio, 53, 1.)

[235] I do not myself see any good reason to doubt that Dio has given at
any rate the substance of these documents. It is not perhaps natural to
us to suppose two men like Mæcenas and Agrippa solemnly reading speeches
to the Emperor; but it was no unusual thing at Rome. Augustus himself is
said to have done it, even to his wife, Livia, and frequently with others
(Sueton., _Aug._ 84). Tacitus says it was the fashion of the time (_Ann._
