4, 37), as it seems to have been still earlier, for Cicero complains that
his nephew, Quintus, had written an elaborate diatribe against him which
he meant to deliver to Iulius Cæsar in Alexandria. (_Ad Att._ xi. 10.)
For similar documents see Dio, 52, 1-40; 53, 3; 55, 15-21.

[236] Dio, 52, 15.

[237] The IMPERIAL provinces were: Hispania Tarraconensis, and Lusitania,
the Galliæ (beyond the Alps), including the districts afterwards called
Germania, superior and inferior, Cœle-Syria, Phœnicia, Cilicia, Cyprus,
Ægypt.

The SENATORIAL were: Sicilia, Hispania Bætica, Sardinia, Africa, Numidia,
Dalmatia, Greece and Epirus, Macedonia, Asia, Crete and Cyrene, Bithynia
and Pontus.

Cisalpine Gaul ceased to be a province, and was included in Italy.

Subsequent changes were:

    B.C. 24. Cyprus and Gallia Narbonensis were transferred to the
    Senate.

    B.C. 21. Dalmatia was transferred to the Emperor.

    B.C. 6. Sardinia was transferred to the Emperor for nine years.

The provinces added during the lifetime of Augustus: Galatia, Lycaonia,
Mœsia, and the minor Alpine provinces were imperial.

All provinces added afterwards were imperial.

[238] Ovid (F. 1, 587-616) says the Ides of January; the Calendarium
Prænestinum gives the 16th. Possibly the one is the date of the SCtum,
the other of the plebiscitum.

[239] Augustus himself uses it in the _Monumentum_ (chs. 30, 32), “me
principe,” “ante me principem.” Horace (_Od._ 1, 21, 13; 2, 30; _Ep._ 2,
1, 256), Propertius (v. 6, 46), both employ it when speaking of Augustus.
It occurs in inscriptions referring to Tiberius, and is the common term
used by Tacitus. If, therefore, it was not formally bestowed (as seems
probable), it soon grew into use as a title in ordinary language. Nor
was it altogether a new idea; Cicero had used it as a possible title of
honour, with which Pompey or Cæsar, had they been moderate, might have
been content. (Cic., _ad Fam._ vi. 6). Again, though it is not a mere
extension of _princeps senatus_, yet it is clearly connected with it.
As the Senatus is the first _ordo_ in the state, the _princeps senatus_
is also _princeps civitatis_. The two titles were soon confounded. Thus
Pliny (_N.H._ xxxvi. § 116) speaks of M. Æmilius Scaurus as _totius
princeps civitatis_, when he means that he had been several times entered
by the Censors on the roll as _princeps senatus_. But a new connotation
became attached to the word from the political powers of the _princeps_.

[240] Horace, _Epode_, vii. 7; _Odes_, i. 21, 15; iii. 5, 2; Propert.,
iii. 23, 5.

[241] Vergil, _Georg._ iii. 25; Horace, _Odes_ iii. 4, 33.

[242] Strabo, ii. 5, 8; iv. 6, 4.

[243] Strabo, _l. c._ In the _Monument_. (ch. 32) Augustus records the
visit of two British princes, Dumnobellaunus and another, of whose name
only the letters _Tinn_ remain (perhaps “Tincommius,” a king of what is
now Sussex).

[244] The triumph of M. Crassus is dated by the Tab. Triumph. C. I. L. 1,
416; but the defeat of the “Dacian Cotiso” is classed with the Cantabrian
war by Horace (_Od._ 3, 8, 18-24), and Livy, _Ep._ 135, mentions a second
war of M. Crassus “against the Thracians,” as contemporary with the
Spanish war.

[245] The Salassi, who had for the last 100 years given much trouble, had
twice in recent years been in arms: in B.C. 35 they defeated C. Antistius
Vetus, and, in B.C. 34, had, with great difficulty, been partly subdued
by Valerius Messalla. Their command of the principal Alpine pass made it
important that they should be kept in check.

[246] Hor., _Od._ 2, 6, 2, _Cantabrum indoctum iuga ferre nostra_.

[247] _Odes_ iii. 8, 21, _servit Hispanæ vetus hostis oræ Cantaber sera
domitus catena_; iii. 14, 3, _Cæsar Hispana repetit Penates Victor ab
ora_.

[248] Perhaps that of which remains exist at Aosta, and cannot now be
dated. That at Turbia was built B.C. 6 (Pliny, _N. H._ 3 § 136). That
at Susa in B.C. 8 [C. I. L. v. 7,231]. Horace may refer to it among the
_Nova Augusti tropæa_ (_Od._ 2, 9, 19).

[249] Horace, _Odes_ i. 29, 1; ii. 12, 24; iii. 24, 1; i. 35, 32-40.

[250] Propert., 3, 1, 11.

[251] Middleton (_Remains of Ancient Rome_, vol. ii. pp. 126-128) seems
to have given good reasons against its connection with the Thermæ of
Agrippa. Lanciani (_Ruins and Excavations_, pp. 476-488) asserts that the
structure as it now stands is of the age of Hadrian (about A.D. 129),
and doubts Agrippa’s original building being of the same shape. Even
the portico with its inscription—M. AGRIPPA L. F. COS. TERT. FECIT—he
thinks was taken to pieces and put up again by Hadrian. The history of
the building, however, cannot be regarded as thoroughly ascertained.
Agrippa’s third consulship was in B.C. 27, whereas Dio places the
completion of the Pantheon under B.C. 25 (53, 27). It may well have been
that the external building was finished and dedicated in B.C. 27, and
that the inside occupied two more years.

[252] A. Licinius Muræna was called A. Terentius Varro Muræna from
being adopted by Terentius Varro. See Dio, 54, 3; Suet., _Aug._ 19;
Hor., _Odes_ 2, 10; Velleius Paterc. 2, 91. Of Fannius Cæpio nothing
practically is known, he was prosecuted by Tiberius for _maiestas_ and
condemned.

[253] In the _cenotaphia Pisana_ Gaius is described after his death as
“iam _designatum_ iustissimum ac simillimum parentis sui virtutibus
_principem_.” But this is probably not an official title.

[254] There seems little doubt that the character of Agrippa Postumus
gave some ground for this measure; but Augustus seems to have regretted
and at times to have contemplated recalling him. His murder immediately
after the death of Augustus is called by Tacitus “the first crime of the
new reign.” Whether Tiberius or Livia was responsible for it cannot be
discussed here.

[255] So Dio (55, 5) says. Suetonius (_Tib._ 16) says five years. There
may have been a renewal after five years.

[256] _Monum. Ancyr._ 27; C.I.L. vi. 701.

[257] This is what Augustus means by saying “that he extended the
frontiers of all the provinces bordering on tribes that had not
submitted” (_Mon. Anc._ 26).

[258] The exact position of Nabata is uncertain. It is described in the
_Mon. Ancyr._ 26 as “close to Meroe.” Augustus takes the responsibility
of both these campaigns as being _meo iussu et auspicio_.

[259] As, for instance, Agrippa. Hor., _Ep._ 1, 12, 1. The seven colonies
mentioned are Syracuse, Tauromenium, Catana, Thermæ, Tyndaris, Lilybæum,
Panormus.

[260] Dio, 54, 8; Horace, _Od._ 3, 5; this ode was written several years
before the restoration of the standards, but the fact of the _milites
Crassi_ having settled in Parthia was naturally known.

[261] Verg., _Æn._ vii. 604-606.

[262] Horace, _Ep._ i. 18, 56; _Odes_ iv. 15, 6.

[263] Propert., 3, 10, 13; 4; 4, 16; 4, 5, 48; 4, 12, 3; 5, 6, 79.

[264] Ovid, _F._ v. 567-594. According to Mommsen there were two temples
of Mars Ultor, one on the Capitol (Dio, 54, 8), the other in the Forum
Augustum, vowed at Philippi, but not dedicated till B.C. 2. The _signa_
seem to have been deposited first in the former and then transferred to
the latter. Ovid evidently speaks of them as in the temple in the Forum
Augustum.

[265] Such as the Brenni and Genauni of Hor., _Od._ iv. 14, 10; cp. iv.
4, 18.

[266] _Mon. Ancyr._, 13; Horace, _Epist._ 2, 1, 255; _Odes_, 4, 15, 9;
Dio, 54, 25. For the inscription, see Clinton, _Fast. Hell._, B.C. 14.
The tenth tribunician year is from June 27th, B.C. 14, to 26th June, B.C.
13. The _ara pacis_ was founded in this year (4th July), dedicated 30th
January, B.C. 9.

[267] But he does not seem to have had any fighting this year, and in
fact the Senate voted to close the Ianus Quirinus, though that was
prevented by an inroad of the Daci into Pannonia, with which Tiberius was
sent to deal. Dio, 54, 36.

[268] Especially in camps, in which there seem to have been a regular
service of _tabellarii castrenses_. (Wilmann’s _Exempla_ 1357.)

[269] The armed provinces were those on the frontier. Towards the end
of the life of Augustus, the preponderance of the military force on
the Rhine and Danube is the noteworthy fact. The Gauls and “Germany”
had eight legions, Spain three, Africa two, Egypt two, Syria four,
Pannonia two, Mœsia two, Dalmatia two. But those on the Rhine were more
concentrated. (Tac., _Ann._ 4, 5.)

[270] C.I.L. x. 8375; _Mon. Ancyr._ 11.

[271] Suet., _Aug._ 98: “As he chanced to be cruising in his yacht round
the bay of Puteoli, the passengers and crew of an Alexandrine ship, which
had just come to land, came with white robes, with garlands on their
heads and burning censers in their hands, loudly blessing and praising
him, and saying that they owed it to him that they were alive, that they
sailed the sea, that they were enjoying their liberty and property.”

[272] Horace, _Odes_ iv. 5.

[273] See, among others, _Ep._ ii. 1-16; _Odes_ 3, 5, 2; 4, 5, 32.

[274] Suet., _Aug._ 52; Dio, 51, 20.

[275] The Latin inscriptions bearing on this point have been collected in
a convenient form by Mr. Rushforth, _Latin Historical Inscriptions_, pp.
51-61. Other places in Italy thus shewn to have adopted the cult in some
form or other during the lifetime of Augustus are Asisium, Beneventum,
Fanum Fortunæ, Pisa, Tibur, Verona, possibly Ancona, and Forum Clodii,
and some unnamed place in Latium.

[276] Plut., _Flamin._ 16; Cicero, _ad Q. Fr._ 1, 1, 9; _ad Att._ 5, 21;
Tac., _Ann._ 4, 56. Polyb. 31, 15.

[277] Appian, b. c. 5, 132, “and the cities began placing his image side
by side with those of their gods.”

[278] Information as to these is mostly to be found in Greek
inscriptions, C.I.G. 3,524, 3,604, 3,831, 4,039. See also Dio, 51, 10;
Strabo, 27, 1, 9; Joseph., _Antiq._ 15, 10, 3; Livy, _Ep._ 137; Pausan.,
iii. 25.

[279] Quintilian, vi. 377.

[280] For this and his statue in the temple of Quirinus, with legend of
_Deo invicto_, the vote of the Senate giving him a temple, flamen, and
other divine honours, see Dio, 43, 45; 44, 6; Cicero, _2 Phil._ § 110;
ad _Att._ 13, 44; Sueton., _Cæs._ 76. It was worse than the case of
Augustus, more insincere and less spontaneous. The Senate was filled with
the protégés of Iulius at the time.

[281] Macrob., _Sat._ 2, 4, 18; Plut., _Cic._ 49; Suet., _Aug._ 28.

[282] See Horace, _Odes_ iii. 4, 22: vester, Camenæ, vester in arduos
| tollor Sabinos, seu mihi frigidum | Præneste seu Tibur supinum | seu
liquidæ pacuere Baiæ.

[283] Apragopolis. In Suetonius (c. 97) it is doubtful whether he means
Capreæ or some other island. Perhaps it is _Nesis_, where M. Brutus had a
villa which might have come into his hands as confiscated property (Cic.,
_ad Att._ xvi. 1-4.)

[284] An echo of his master’s feelings on this point is as usual found in
Horace, _Od._ ii. 15.

[285] Another tragedy “Achilles” is mentioned by Suidas.

[286] Hor., _Od._ 3, 136. Suetonius (_Aug._ 85) mentions others, “An
answer to Brutus about Cato,” evidently a youthful essay; “Exhortations
to Philosophy,” no doubt youthful too; an hexameter poem called
_Sicilia_. When he tried to read them in later life to a family audience
they bored him so much that he handed the rolls over to Tiberius to
finish. Lastly, a short volume of Epigrams which he used to compose in
the bath.

[287] Hor., _Epist._ 2, 1.

[288] In B.C. 46, 42, 25, and 23. From that time, however, though
generally delicate he seems not to have had any serious attack.

[289] The _lex Iulia et Titia_, enabling the provincial governor to
assign guardians to such persons as were legally bound to have them, was
passed between the 1st of May and 1st of October, B.C. 31, the period
during which M. Titius was consul.

[290] Authorities will be found in Mommsen, _res gestæ_, p. 96.

[291] _Mon. Ancyr._, 25.

[292] C. I. L. xi. 365; _Mon. Ancyr._ 20. “In my seventh consulship I
remade the Flaminian road from the city to Ariminum, and all the bridges
except the Mulvian and Minucian.”

[293] See Suet., _Aug._ 46. The regions are described by Pliny alone,
_N.H._ iii. 46-128.

[294] The inscription on the road to Salonæ in Dalmatia is dated A.D.
19, but it must have been begun much earlier. For the other roads see
Willmanns 832, 829, 830, 832; Clinton’s _Fasti_, anno B.C. 14; _Journal
of Hellenic Studies_, xii. part i. p. 109 _sq._ C. I. L. iii. 6,974.

[295] Digest, 47, 11, 6. The penalties varied from a fine to exclusion
from the corn trade, _relegatio_, and condemnation to public works.

[296] Cicero, pro Sest. § 103; _ad Att._ vi. 6; Livy, vi. 12; Appian, b.
c. ii. 120; Dionys. H. xii. 24.

[297] Quoted by Sueton., _Aug._ 42.

[298] Dio, 53, 20, 33; Horace, _Odes_ 1, 2.

[299] The Sacred Colleges (1) were exempt from military service, imposts
and public services of all kinds; (2) had a charge on the _ager publicus_
for sacrifices, feasts, &c.; (3) in most cases had estates besides; (4)
received special grants from time to time for repairs of buildings.

[300] _Mon. Ancy._, 10; Livy, _Ep._ 117; Vell., ii. 63; App., b. c. v.
131; Dio, 44, 53. All these authorities speak of the irregularity of the
election of Lepidus.

[301] _Ephemeris Epigraphica_, viii. 2; Lindsay’s _Latin Inscriptions_,
p. 102.

[302] _Carmen Sæcul._ 13.

[303] Horace, _Odes_ iv. 5, 21; iv. 15, 9-12.

[304] We frequently hear in earlier times of the scandal caused by
certain people abandoning the heavy and not very comfortable toga for
