lighter dress, Greek or Gallic. Those who care to trace the history of
such a matter will find references to it in Cicero, _pro Rab. Post._ §
27; 2 _Phil._ § 76; Livy, 29, 19; Tac., _Ann._ ii. 59; Hor., _Ep._ 1,
7, 65. And if it is desired to see how futile such orders are against a
prevailing fashion, the continued disuse of it may be traced in Juvenal
1, 119; 3, 172; Mart. 1, 49, 31; 12, 18, 17; Suet., _Aug._ 40; and as
late as Hadrian we find that the order needed renewal, Spart. _Had._ 22.
George III. insisting that Bishops should wear wigs is a case in point.

[305] Cicero (_in Pis._ § 67) speaks with scorn of the vulgar rich man
who had five, or sometimes more, guests on each couch.

[306] Though in making regulations on these subjects Augustus acted on
his censorial powers, when it came to enacting laws he would propose them
to the tribes in virtue of his tribunician powers.

[307] _De adulteriis coercendis; de pudicitia; de maritandis ordinibus._

[308] Dio, 56, 2-10; Suet., _Aug._ 34.

[309] Martial, _Epigr._, xi. 20.

[310] Pliny, _N. H._ 7 § 149; Dio, 54, 9.

[311] In A.D. 11 the people of Narbonne founded an altar to him in
gratitude for some reform in their constitution which he had either
granted or initiated. (Wilmanns, 194.)

[312] Asia and Sicily originally did not pay a _stipendium_, but tithes
on produce. This system was abolished by Iulius Cæsar.

[313] Suet., _August._ 76.

[314] Suet., _Tib._ 11.

[315] Dio, 56, 29. But there does not appear to have been one that year.
There was a partial eclipse of the moon on the 4th of April and a total
eclipse on the 27th of September.

[316] The Mausoleum was a huge mound of earth covered with shrubs, upon
a substructure or dome cased with white marble and surrounded by walks
and plantations, and surmounted by a bronze statue of Augustus. On
the still-existing foundation there is now what is called the _Teatro
Correa_. Besides this the spot on which his body was burnt was also
enclosed and planted. Strab., iv. 53. Middleton, _Remains of Ancient
Rome_, vol. ii. p. 288.

[317] It ought, however, to be said to his credit that he forbade the
exhibition of gladiators _sine missione_, _i.e._, without the right of
being allowed to depart safe from the arena when defeated if the people
so willed it.

[318] See note on p. 147.

[319] Horace, _Od._ iii. 8.

[320] Seneca, _Epp._ 114; _Digest._ 24, 1, 64.

[321] 2, 17, 13; 3, 1, 13; 3, 23, 5; 4, 3; 4, 4, 48; 4, 11, 3; 5, 6,
79-84.

[322] For purposes of comparison of these sums with our money, 1,000
sesterces may be taken as equivalent to about £8 10s., and a denarius as
about 10d.

[323] A pound of gold worth about £45.

[324] These names and some other words are obliterated in the
inscription, both Latin and Greek.




INDEX


  A

  Abydos, 80

  Achæan League, the, 27

  Achaia, 27, 28;
    colonies in, 133

  Acilius, M., 23

  Actium, 86, 123-24, 290;
    colony at, 175

  _Ad capita bubula_, 1

  _Ad gallinas_, 205

  Ægina separated from Athens, 176

  Ælius Gallus, 155, 174

  Æmilius Lepidus, M., as prætor (B.C. 49) holds election for dictator,
        8;
    appointed to Hispania Citerior, 23;
    visits Sextus Pompeius, 42;
    in Transalpine Gaul, 59;
    joins Antony, 64;
    becomes one of the triumvirate, 70, 71;
    announces the close of the proscriptions, 74;
    suspected of intriguing with Sextus Pompeius, 82, 87;
    his inferior position, 88;
    in Africa, 99;
    comes to Sicily, 104;
    claims to govern Sicily, 105;
    deposed from the triumvirate, 106;
    his office of Pontifex Maximus, 107, 112, 160;
    his death, 160;
    see also 202, 221, 222

  Æmilius Lepidus, M. (son of the triumvir), his conspiracy, 123;
    his brother, 258

  Æmilius Paullus Lepidus, L., (brother of the triumvir), proscribed, 72

  _Ærarium_, the, 148, 249, 296

  Æthiopia, 174, 299

  Afranius, 23

  Africa, province of, 24-26, 99;
    see also 9, 11, 65, 71, 171;
    colonies in, 133;
    New Africa, 25, 113

  Agrippa, _see_ “Vipsanius”

  Agrippa, Postumus, 167, 168, 277

  Agrippina, 167

  Ahenobarbus, _see_ “Domitius”

  Aix, 134

  Alaudæ, the, 47

  Alba Fucensis, 49, 51, 53

  Albis (R. Elbe), 184, 186, 187

  Alexandria, 11, 116, 117, 120, 121, 125, 127, 198

  Allienus, Aul., 23, 31, 80

  Alps, provinces of the, 17, 172

  Amanus, Mount, 30

  Amatius (the pseudo-Marius), 13

  Amisia (R. Ems), 184

  Amnesty to the Assassins, 38

  Amphipolis, 83

  Amyntas, king of Galatia, 30, 173;
    and of Pisidia, 102, 108

  Ancyra, 171;
    temple of Augustus and Rome at, 176, 198, 261

  _Annonæ præfectus_, 216, 217

  Antiochus, king of Commagene, 116

  Antistius Vetus, C., 31, 113, 154, 202

  Antonius Musa (physician), 158, 161

  Antonius, C. (brother of Marcus), defeated in Illyricum, 22;
    in Macedonia, 27, 48, 49;
    prætor (B.C. 44), 38, 40

  Antonius, Julius (son of Marcus), 239

  Antonius, L. (brother of Marcus), 26;
    Trib. Pl. (B.C. 44), 38, 41;
    triumphs as consul (B.C. 41), 89;
    his quarrel with Augustus, 91, 93-5;
    besieged in Perusia, 95-6

  Antony (M. Antonius), depreciates Augustus, 3;
    as Tribune (B.C. 50) vetoes the recall of Iulius Cæsar, 7;
    Consul (B.C. 44), 18;
    his speech at Cæsar’s funeral, 36;
    opposes the claims of Octavian, 38-9;
    takes the money in the temple of Ops, 39-40;
    his use of Cæsar’s papers and his intrigues with the veterans, 42;
    accuses Octavian of plotting his assassination, 44-5;
    suppresses a mutiny at Brundisium, 48;
    his speech at Tibur, 49;
    goes to Ariminum, 50;
    commissioners sent to, 54;
    his letter to Hirtius and Octavian, 55;
    his approval of the murder of Trebonius, 29;
    his siege of Mutina, 56;
    defeated at Forum Gallorum, 57-8;
    his great march to Vada, 59;
    declared a _hostis_, 59-60;
    agrees with Lepidus and Octavian to form the triumvirate, 68-70;
    his hold on Pompey’s property, 82;
    his campaign at Philippi, 82-6;
    goes to the East, 87;
    his infatuation for Cleopatra, 91, 116, 117;
    joins Sextus Pompeius in invading Italy, 98;
    makes terms with Augustus and marries Octavia, 99, 100;
    his legate puts Sextus Pompeius to death, 108;
    his failures in the East, 116;
    his final quarrel with Augustus, 118-21;
    divorces Octavia, 120;
    his defeat at Actium, 122-25;
    his final struggle in Egypt, 126;
    his death at Alexandria, 127;
    estimate of, 130;
    his letter to Augustus, 231

  Antyllus (son of Antony), 127, 129

  Apamea (in Syria), 30, 31

  Apollo, temple and libraries of, 115, 156, 204, 205

  Apollonia (in Epirus), 15, 34, 278;
    (in Cyrene), 32;
    (in Pisidia), 261

  Apragopolis, 206

  Aqua Marcia, 212, 297

  Aquæ Statiellæ, 59

  Aquileia, 234

  Aquitania, 20

  Arabia, deserts of, 17, 30;
    expeditions into, 155, 156, 174

  Archelaus, king of Cappadocia, 173

  Argentoratum (Strassburg), 185

  Ariminum, 7, 48, 71

  Ariobarzanes, king of Cappadocia, 80

  Armenia, 118, 177;
    king of, 116, 125, 167

  Arminius, chief of the Cherusci, 187, 188

  Army, unity of the, 191

  Arsinoe (in Cyrene), 32

  Artagera, 167

  Artavasdes, 173, 174

  Artaxes, 173, 174, 177

  Arvales, 220

  Asia, province of, 9, 28, 88;
    _Asia recepta_, 174

  Asinius Gallus, 258, 263

  Asinius Pollio, C., in Bætica, 23;
    joins Antony, 59, 69;
    superintends assignment of lands, 90, 283;
    awaits Antony after Perusia, 97;
    assists at the treaty of Brundisium, 99;
    triumphs over the Parthini, 102

  Asprenas, L., 188

  Astura, 256

  Astures in Spain, the, 153, 154, 179

  At the Oxheads, 1

  Athenodorus of Tarsus, 15, 231

  Athens, 27, 101;
    not favoured by Augustus, 175

  Atia, mother of Augustus, 2, 3, 15, 36, 37;
    death of, 78
